Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
It's a simple fact that World War II could not have been fought, much less won, without naval construction battalions, better known as Seabees.
Today you'll meet John Blazens of Bryan, but I dare say that many of you already know him.
After all, he has lived all but 10 of his 82 years in Bryan.
Born in Bryan, proud member of Stephen F. Austin High School Class of 1942, Aggie Class of 1947, and a proud sailor with the 105th Seabees, serving the Pacific Campaign in Australia, New Guinea, and the Philippines at the Leyte Gulf.
It's a pleasure to have you on Veterans of the Valley.
I want to talk about a man who
probably knows brian as well as anybody you were born here i know your dad was in the grocery business and also in the cotton business here born in brian and spent like we said all but 10 years in brian talk about what brian texas was like back in the the 1930s i guess when you were just a young kid growing up what was the town like well brian was main street
A few businesses on Bryan Street.
Basically, everything went up and down Main Street.
All the grocery stores were there, as well as the clothing stores and the drug stores.
Just about anything that you wanted at that
So what we know is downtown Bryan now, that's just where practically all the commerce was.
When you wanted to buy something, go to the grocery store, go to a movie, go get clothes, you went to downtown Bryan.
That's true.
You parked at the curb and walked into the business you wanted to deal with, and then you drove two blocks down the street and parked at the curb again.
Right, right.
And Bryan, as we know it today, it wasn't anything like it then.
It was pretty much a shrunk version of what we see now because the paved roads were sort of few and far between, right?
That's correct.
Texas Avenue was Highway 6, and there was a paved street that went west to serve Bowie Elementary School, and there was a paved street that went east to serve Travis Elementary School, and that was pretty near it.
So if you wanted to get from downtown Bryan to Texas A&M, you would take Highway 6 up to what we know as the bend right now, and then that would go on to College Avenue on the campus.
That's how you got to campus, right?
College Avenue, Old College Road.
and what is now Weldon Road to get to the campus.
Right.
Of course, you had Texas A&M on the other side, and then you had Brian.
How did the citizenry and all of that deal with Texas A&M?
Obviously, Texas A&M was a big industry then, just like it is now.
Yes, and of course, Brian probably felt then much like College Station does now, the home of Texas A&M.
Right.
It was the agriculture and mechanical college.
You said that your dad was in the cotton business.
Cotton was a big industry back then in Bryan, and that had a lot to do with the railroad, I guess, right?
Well, cotton was the valley, the brightest bottom, the farmers.
raised mostly cotton as far as a pay prop went.
Right, right.
You went to Stephen F. Austin, as a matter of fact, this past summer.
It's actually after we're taping this, but
before it's airing on TV in June, you had a reunion at the class of 1942 of Stephen F. Austin High School.
A lot of people, of course, obviously know that was the pre of what we know now as Bryan High School.
Talk a little bit about Stephen F. Austin back in the 40s.
Obviously, it was a wonderful school, a lot of great memories.
Well, yeah, Stephen F. Austin was a new high school, and Lamar Junior High School originated in the original
high school building so that
When I went, Stephen F. Austin was only about three years old in the facility as it is today.
Right.
And we had the three classes and lots of football support, of course.
That was still the number one sport.
Speaking of football, you were the class of 1942, but you actually didn't receive your diploma until after the fall of 1942.
And that had something to do with football and your desire to play quarterback that last year in the fall of 1942.
Sort of talk about how that worked.
Well, it was just the fact that you could play high school football until you were 18.
And so I was 17 and was eligible to play another semester.
So I did not graduate in May of 42, but came back that fall.
And took an English class or something like that?
Or took a couple of classes in the fall so you could be eligible for football, right?
Yes.
English was one of the state mandated courses.
If you didn't have all your English credits, you couldn't graduate.
Right.
So you waited until the fall to take that so you could play football and then finish.
And I think you told me you were the first T-formation quarterback of Brian High or Stephen F. Austin, right?
Yes, that's true.
That's great.
Right after you graduated from high school, you entered Texas A&M.
So actually that would have been in the spring semester, I guess earlier January of 1943.
That's when you entered Texas A&M.
That's correct.
Yeah, yeah.
I went one semester to Texas A&M.
And then, of course, we were already involved in the war, this being in 1943.
Then talk about your desire to enter the service, and particularly the Navy, and you sort of had to, the timing was such to where if you wanted to be in the Navy, you had to go to Houston on a particular time and say hello to the draft office.
Sort of talk about your desire to be in the Navy.
Well, at 18, you became draft eligible, and we had to,
We looked at the military and some of us wanted to be in the Navy and others wanted to wait until they were drafted and I was one of those that had the desire to be in the Navy.
So your dad took you to Houston on the day that when the draftees were being put in the Navy.
So you timed it that way on purpose so that you could be in the Navy.
That's correct.
Right, right.
And tell us where you were sent initially.
I know you were sent to the East Coast and then a long, long trip to the West Coast.
So after you up, sort of talk about your training before you went overseas.
Well, there was a CB training base at Williamsburg, Virginia, right on the Chesapeake Bay.
And we were sent there for what they call boot camp still.
And then we were assigned to battalions and moved out to different parts of the world.
Right.
So it wasn't until you went to Virginia that you realized that you were going to be assigned to the construction battalion and that you were going to be a CB, right?
Yes, I was told I was a CB before we left Texas.
Before you left Texas, so you knew what you were in for and that you would be there.
A three-week train ride from Virginia to California, and they took quite a route.
You remember that three-week train ride a lot, don't you?
Yes.
I suppose it was for security purposes, but we went up into Ohio and back down to the Texas Panhandle, and then the train went all the way to South Chicago.
and then back down to New Mexico and finally up through Salt Lake City and cross the mountains there into California.
Three weeks on the train.
That was quite a ride and quite an indirect route to get there.
Port Wynnebe, I believe it is, in Southern California, which is a base that is known for its training of sea bees.
It's one of the largest sea bee centers, or the largest on the West Coast.
Talk about that.
It still exists with a museum there, I believe.
Well, that was the base where our battalion organized itself in a big manner and went through typical training.
We had all the rumors of going to Alaska or going to South Pacific that abounded in, I guess, every military organization, but we were being prepared.
Right.
John, I want you to talk about the Seabees.
I have always been personally just fascinated with the work that they did.
While some people might not consider it the big action spot of the war,
It's true.
I mean, the war could not have been fought, could not have been won without what the Seabees did, especially in the Pacific theater, in the Pacific campaign, because y'all built stuff.
Y'all made something out of nothing as far as runways, as far as Quonset huts, like you talk about, bridges, piers, and things like that.
Talk about the Seabees to the people that may not be familiar with exactly what the role of the Seabees was in World War II.
In an island war, of course, each island had its individual problems.
And Seabees went in, and our job was to prepare airstrips or to prepare buildings for training and some hospitals.
We built our battalion hospitals.
built a base for PT boats in the Philippines.
And so we did a little bit of all kinds of construction work and that permitted those involved in the actual combat
go about their business without worrying about details maybe.
Right.
Well, planes needed a runway to land on.
And once they got there, they needed a place to live.
Storage was a big deal, obviously, because there was equipment constantly being supplied to the Pacific theater.
Where are you going to put all this stuff?
One of the things you were involved in was the building of Quonset huts and not just for people to live, but you talked about how they were strung together to make warehouses.
So you were heavy into construction, right?
Yes.
Well,
I was assigned to a crew that was primarily involved in building quantity.
So we built small ones for officer quarters.
We built larger ones for people to live in, the crews and everything.
Or we built, tied them together in a way to make some very enormous warehouse facilities because the supplies that were coming to the Pacific
It was very enormous.
When we went to the Philippines, I think that there were over 150 ships in Lady Gulf at one time, right at the time of the re-invasion.
Right, right.
And when we're talking about supplies, we're not just talking about guns and ammo and things like that.
We're talking about tanks and trucks and the vehicles that it took to fight the war.
I mean, we're talking about large, large equipment
that you all had to deal with and find a place for.
Yes, that and food.
An enormous amount of food had to be brought in to serve our troops.
Right, right.
And this is food, I guess, that you had to make sure that it didn't spoil and had to be properly cared for and all that and feed the troops.
So it's just a fascinating part of the war, the Navy Seabees.
When you left California initially, I want to back up a little bit, you first went down south to Australia and then straight north of Australia to New Guinea before you went to the Philippines.
So talk about your route from California and what you did at each place.
Well, rather than a convoy, our troop ship was
alone so it went as far south as it could reasonably go and then in order to avoid Japanese submarines and then circle around and then came back north and and landed on the east coast of Australia or at least we anchored there for about a month before they moved us on north to New Guinea and of course at that time combat was still underway
on the island of New Guinea.
And then when they got ready to recapture the Philippine Islands, well, then we were loaded onto transports that had all of our supplies and equipment on them.
And we headed north and ended up at Lady Gulf on the same day that General MacArthur returned.
I see.
Latte Gulf, obviously a hot spot of the Pacific campaign.
And while you say you weren't directly involved in combat operations, you could hear it from where you were, right?
That's correct.
They were pretty close to us anyway.
Right, right.
You said that one of the things that your unit did was build piers and you believe that possibly where you were may have been involved where former President John F. Kennedy and his PT boat might have docked because he was in the Philippines at one time in his service, right?
Yes, there was a PT base between the island of Leyte and the island of Samar.
The ocean channel there was pretty narrow and the PT boat should come in there and dock and re-service and make plans to go back into the ocean.
Right, right, right.
Three photos that Mr. Blazens has supplied us.
These are photos from his home that I want to show you.
Young John Blazens at Texas A&M and then later in the Navy.
And you can see that picture right there.
Is that your senior picture at Texas A&M?
Well, we had it up on the screen.
And now it has gone away.
Oh, there we go.
There you are back again.
Is that your senior photo at Texas A&M?
Well, I would more or less say that was my freshman photo.
Your freshman photo.
After the war, I did not have to be in the Corps.
That's right.
You weren't in the Corps.
So that would have been your first year, that one semester before you went into the Navy.
Quite a good-looking young man.
Wow.
And then the next photo is a little later when you were in a Navy photograph.
So this was taken just a few years later?
Yes.
That's correct.
Right.
And now we've got a picture of one of your units.
As you can see, we're gonna enlarge that a little bit.
You can see that that's from a book, sort of an annual yearbook that was made of the 105th Seabees, Chief Lambing's crew.
And I believe you said that you were on the back row, sort of in the middle, is that right?
Fourth from the left?
Yes.
There you are.
Yeah, fourth from the left on the back row.
So that was essentially the laboring crew right there that you worked with?
That's correct.
particular time and we were building these all storage tanks in the Philippines and they were built from sheets of steel which were connected with nuts and bolts and washers.
And that's one of the storage tanks that you're standing in front of.
Right.
And these storage tanks, I know you talked to me earlier about a lot of the storage that you all did was oil.
and things like that, and that was kind of a dicey situation in case the enemy should come over.
You didn't want that oil sitting out there because that would have been a bomb waiting to go off, right?
Well, that's probably true, although by the time we were building on those, the United States had pretty much air superiority.
Right, right, right.
You were in the Philippines when the war ended.
And at that time, I believe you said you had your choice of joining the occupational forces or going home.
And you decided to go home and continue your education.
So talk about that decision and what your desires were then.
Well, I guess at that age, I still wasn't 21.
I had been away from home over two years.
And I got a little homesick as well as wanting to get back into school.
Indeed.
And in all, you were overseas for two years.
So you had served a good service there from December of 43 to December of 1945.
And you came back home and you went right back into Texas A&M while you were class of 47.
You ended up not getting out until 1950 because of your war service.
And you took your CB experience and went right into civil engineering.
Is that right?
Talk about that and what your career was after that.
Well, basically, that's one of life's events that made me decide what I wanted to do, and I came back and said I wanted to major in civil engineering, which I did.
And you helped build highways, is that right?
You worked for the highway department for several years.
That's correct.
I worked for the Texas Highway Department, or now the Department of Transportation, for 37 years.
Spent eight years in Brenham?
Yeah.
Talk about what you did then.
Well, I was in the residency there, and we were contracting and constructing various highways in Washington County at that time.
Right, including 290 that goes around Brenham.
That's correct, yeah.
Then I came to Bryan.
I was made the district construction engineer in the Bryan District, which encompasses 10 counties that surround Brazos County.
One thing we haven't talked about is your athletic career.
We talked about that you played quarterback for Stephen F. Austin your senior year, but then you became a baseball man.
As a matter of fact, you're wearing your baseball tie today.
You played for Marty Carroll's Texas A&M team, I believe, for a year.
And you described yourself as a scrub, but you were a middle infielder.
And so talk about your experiences in baseball, which later became actually a semi-pro career in Brenham.
So talk about...
John Blazins and his baseball career?
Well, I had played baseball with local teams in Bryan while I was at A&M.
And as I mentioned before, one year in 1948, Marty Grose said he was shorthanded and he put out a call and it was kind of like the 12th man.
And I
A couple hundred of us came out, and we worked out for two or three weeks at different times, and he chose about four of us to be on the baseball squad.
So this is sort of a 12-man story that few people know about, is the call for the baseball team.
And you say a couple hundred showed up, and it just sort of got pared down and pared down, and you were one of four that made the eventual cut.
I was one of the lucky ones.
I enjoyed the experience of being on the NM baseball team and we get season tickets and go to all the games we can.
Now this was back when the baseball field was in essentially what the parking lot of Kyle Field is now, right?
That's correct.
Yeah.
And then your baseball career continued somewhat when you went to Brenham because you played for the semi-pro team there in Brenham, the Brenham Lions, right?
That's correct.
They had the semi-pro team there, which were mostly local Brenham men and boys.
And we played different teams all around Texas, from Houston primarily, and teams like Giddings and LaGrange and
At that time, they all had baseball teams.
Right, right.
And there was a fellow on this Brenham team who had a sister named Madeline.
Yeah.
Yeah, that worked out pretty good for you.
Tell us about that.
I've been married to Madeline for 56 years.
That's right.
So you met her.
She was a sister of one of your teammates.
That's correct.
And you all have been married for some 56 years now.
And you still love baseball.
I think you said you even pitched for your...
for your church when you were 65 in the softball league, right?
Slow pitch.
A lot slower pitch, is that right?
You and Madeline were married.
Talk a little bit about your family.
I know you have a couple of kids and grandkids.
Talk about your kids and what they do.
You are fortunate in that your kids and your grandkids both live here in the area, right?
That's correct, yes.
Our son, David, has a small construction company called Blaco Construction, and he does work in the local area.
He and his wife, Beth, have one son, Andrew,
We'll be 18 this year.
Right.
And then our daughter, Sarah, she's an Aggie sociology grader and she works for the Bryan Independent School District.
And she and her husband have two children, Reed, who is 16, and Melissa, who is 12.
Right.
And so they're both in the community.
Reed and Melissa are swimmers and they do
competitive swimming and so on.
I think you said your daughter with the BISD is involved with a lot of the families that are still in the area that were evacuees from Katrina, so that takes up a lot of her time, right?
She's involved with some of those who are students at Bryan Hotsky.
I want to rewind a little bit some of your times at Texas A&M that you talked about.
You can recall December 7, 1941.
You were 16.
You were in high school.
And what did your dad say to you about that time?
It turned out to be a profitable statement.
It turned out to be a profit on the statement.
Yes, that's true.
When we heard about it that day, he looked at me and said, if this last
long enough, you'll be involved.
And he was right.
Certainly he was right.
Indeed.
You were involved in the war.
When you were in high school, you did come to A&M campus every once in a while to attend football games.
You said when the Knothole League came up, you were able to watch Aggie football games.
What do you remember about Aggie football back when you were in high school?
Well, for us Aggie football was the only football at that time.
Exactly.
We watched them and supported them strongly.
Right.
I don't know whether worship is the right word, but we worship the stars that came up along those days.
1939.
Dick Todd and John Kimbrough.
1939, they won the national championship.
So you were, yeah, you were here at that time.
You told me a funny story about when Franklin D. Roosevelt came to College Station and came to Kyle Field and they sort of recruited people to make it look crowded at Kyle Field, right?
Right.
He made a speech there and I think
The entire city of Bryan closed down just about and everybody went out to Kyle Field.
It made it look like there was a crowd in the grandstand.
And you were one of them that was in the background, right?
Right.
The Navy Seabees, again, it's a facet of the service that I'm fascinated with.
Obviously, being a member of the Seabees is something that you're very proud of because it obviously gave you your career, gave you the skills that
that they gave you your career sort of talk about your your deep feelings and your lifelong feelings about this this group and the people well it's sometimes difficult to express how you feel about an organization these were people who came from all parts of life the leaders
of the CBs were experienced construction people.
You mentioned Chief Lambding, who was from Lufkin.
He had been in the construction business for a number of years.
And so those of us who came in, say, through the draft, we were assigned there to perform the labor.
But there were a lot of those young men who became accomplished
and skilled at certain amounts of parts of the work.
Some of us got a hold of construction equipment we had never seen.
When we were building the piers, there were a lot of drills and jackhammers and saws that went on and the young guys were the ones that had to perform that work.
I have been proud that
that the organization has set up these museums.
There are museums for all facets of the military service around.
In Mississippi and in California now, there are CB museums, which have recorded some of the work that the CBs did.
There wasn't much of it like John Wayne's movie,
They got into a battle, but occasionally it was frightening.
Yeah.
Well, I think it's just incredible some of the pictures that I've seen, especially in the Philippines and Okinawa and Guadalcanal where they would take a landscape that was just
forest, and they could just flatten that out and make runways that the biggest bombers could land on.
It's almost mind-boggling what the CVs could do with their skills and not a whole lot of equipment, but just with their skills.
It's entirely fascinating.
Well, that sort of thing kind of creates pride in an organization.
Absolutely.
And I've always valued that experience.
Growing up, maybe that's the way to put it, and making some life decisions.
Well, John Blazens, we're out of time, but thank you for your service, and thank you for being here as a proud Navy CB, and thank you to your service to World War II, and a lifelong Brianite.
You helped make the city what it is.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for the opportunity.
All right.
John Blazens and his wife, Madeline, are proud parents of a son and a daughter and three grandchildren.
They live in their home that they built in Bryan in 1960.
The skills that he learned as a Navy Seabee in World War II served him well in his career as a highwayman.
We salute John Blazens and all the proud members of Navy construction battalions who served our country.
And we salute all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbeville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.